# sensors-25-01786

## Page 1

Academic Editor: Boyang Li
Received: 9 February 2025
Revised: 2 March 2025
Accepted: 12 March 2025
Published: 13 March 2025
Citation: Zhang, Z.; Li, G. UAV
Imagery Real-Time Semantic
Segmentation with Global–Local
Information Attention. Sensors 2025 ,
25, 1786. https://doi.org/10.3390/
s25061786
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
UA V Imagery Real-Time Semantic Segmentation with
Global–Local Information Attention
Zikang Zhang and Gongquan Li *
School of Geosciences, Yangtze University, Wuhan 430100, China; 2022710475@yangtzeu.edu.cn
*Correspondence: chuck123@yangtzeu.edu.cn
Abstract: In real-time semantic segmentation for drone imagery, current lightweight al-
gorithms suffer from the lack of integration of global and local information in the image,
leading to missed detections and misclassifications in the classification categories. This
paper proposes a method for the real-time semantic segmentation of drones that integrates
multi-scale global context information. The principle utilizes a UNet structure, with the
encoder employing a Resnet18 network to extract features. The decoder incorporates a
global–local attention module, where the global branch compresses and extracts global
information in both vertical and horizontal directions, and the local branch extracts local
information through convolution, thereby enhancing the fusion of global and local infor-
mation in the image. In the segmentation head, a shallow-feature fusion module is used
to multi-scale integrate the various features extracted by the encoder, thereby strengthen-
ing the spatial information in the shallow features. The model was tested on the UAvid
and UDD6 datasets, achieving accuracies of 68% mIoU (mean Intersection over Union)
and 67% mIoU on the two datasets, respectively, 10% and 21.2% higher than the baseline
model UNet. The real-time performance of the model reached 72.4 frames/s, which is
54.4 frames/s higher than the baseline model UNet. The experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed model balances accuracy and real-time performance well.
Keywords: real-time semantic segmentation; drone imagery; feature fusion; global context
information
1. Introduction
With the continuous advancement of drone technology, low-altitude drones can collect
real-time images at any time and even capture data from different angles. As shown in
Figure 1, urban images collected by UAVs have high resolution and contain rich spatial
information, which has great potential in disaster assessment [ 1,2], emergency response [ 3],
traffic analysis [4,5], environmental monitoring [6,7], and other applications.
Semantic segmentation is a novel and challenging task in various image processing
tasks for drone remote sensing. Semantic segmentation aims to classify every pixel in an
image based on its semantic information. In recent years, the introduction and continuous
improvement of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable results
in semantic segmentation tasks [8,9].
Current drone image analysis systems rely on images captured by drones and then
uploaded to a computer platform for analysis. However, in the face of urban scene problems,
such as urban land-use analysis and traffic management, it is necessary to segment the
categories of ground objects in the urban scene in real-time for analysis. Therefore, a
lightweight semantic segmentation model is needed to segment UAV images in application.
Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 https://doi.org/10.3390/s25061786

## Page 2

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 2 of 19
At present, many semantic segmentation methods try to increase the network depth and
the number of channels of the model to capture richer semantic and spatial information
so as to obtain better segmentation results. However, increasing the depth and number
of channels also increases the number of parameters in the network, thus requiring more
computing power from the hardware, in a way that undoubtedly increases the inference
time of the model.
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 19



Figure 1. Two drone images and their semantic annotati ons from the UAvid an d the UDD6 dataset,
respectively. ( a) Oblique projection, ( b) Orthophoto projection.
Semantic segmentation is a novel and challenging task in various image processing
tasks for drone remote sensing. Semantic segmen tation aims to classify every pixel in an
image based on its semantic information. In recent years, the introduction and continuous improvement of convolutional neural networks  (CNNs) have achieved remarkable results
in semantic segmentation tasks [8,9].
Current drone image analysis systems rely on images captured by drones and then
uploaded to a computer platform for analysis. However, in the face of urban scene prob-
lems, such as urban land-use analysis and tra ﬃc management, it is necessary to segment
the categories of ground objects in the urban scene in real-time for analysis. Therefore, a lightweight semantic segmentation model is needed to segment UAV images in
Figure 1. Two drone images and their semantic annotations from the UAvid and the UDD6 dataset,
respectively. ( a) Oblique projection, ( b) Orthophoto projection.
Pre-trained models are usually trained on massive amounts of data, which improves
the efficiency and stability of training. However, for real-time semantic segmentation
tasks, adopting a large pre-trained model not only improves accuracy but also brings
high computational complexity. Therefore, this paper uses a lightweight pre-trained
ResNet18 model as the encoder in the UNet model for feature extraction, which solves the
limitations of unmanned aerial vehicle devices. This article designs a lightweight global–
local attention block for decoders that require lightweight operations. This block consists
of a global attention branch and a convolutional local branch, used to capture global and

## Page 3

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 3 of 19
local contextual information about features. Finally, multi-scale methods are applied at the
end of the decoder to fuse the features extracted by the encoder at different stages in order
to enrich the spatial information of shallow features. Then, the fused features are added to
the features of the global–local attention block, and the segmentation results are obtained
through 1 ×1 convolution and upsampling.
2. Related Works
2.1. Network Architecture
In recent years, with the rapid advancement of deep learning technology, deep learning
networks for real-time semantic segmentation tasks have mainly been categorized into
single-branch, dual-branch, and U-shaped networks.
Single-branch networks focus primarily on the encoder, simplifying the decoder lay-
ers. The decoder is often designed to be very lightweight, reducing the parameters and
computational load of the decoder and other branches, thus improving the computational
speed of the model. Liu et al. [ 10] proposed a feature pyramid encoding block that en-
codes multi-scale contextual features using deep dilated convolutions at all encoder stages.
On the NVIDIA TiTanV , they tested the Cityscapes and CamVid datasets at a resolution
of1024×512, achieving a real-time performance of 102 frames per second (fps) with
accuracies of 68% mIoU and 65.4% mIoU, respectively.
Compared to single-branch networks, dual-branch networks use one branch to extract
spatial information and another to model semantic contextual information. This structure
balances segmentation accuracy and inference speed. Yu et al. first proposed the bilateral
segmentation network, BiSeNet [ 11]. The spatial path branch extracts shallow spatial
information to generate high-resolution features, while the context path extracts deep,
rich semantic information. A feature fusion module is used to merge the two types of
features. On TitanXP , testing the Cityscapes dataset at a resolution of 2048 ×1024 achieved
a real-time performance of 65.5 fps with an accuracy of 74.7% more. Fan et al. proposed
a short-term dense cascade network (SDCN), which adjusts the depth and number of
convolution kernels to capture receptive fields of different features [ 12]. The spatial path
branch uses only the features from stage 3, and DetailHead is employed only during
training to extract more spatial detail. Testing on 1080 Ti with the Cityscapes dataset at
512×1024 resolution achieved 250.4 fps with an accuracy of 71.9% more.
U-shaped networks adopt an encoder–decoder structure, allowing them to sample
and fuse features across different scales, extracting rich spatial and contextual information.
Zhang et al. introduced a scale-aware semantic extractor that extracts semantic information
at different scales, capturing the entire image’s receptive fields and semantic informa-
tion [ 13]. Testing on Snapdragon 865 with the ADE20K dataset at 512 ×512 resolution
achieved 13 fps with an accuracy of 36.1% more. Wang et al. improved model precision
and accuracy by using a lightweight pre-trained model, ResNet18, as the encoder and pro-
posed a global–local transformer block in the decoder to capture global and local context at
multiple scales [ 14]. They also introduced a feature refinement head to fuse features from
the encoder and decoder, enhancing both semantic and spatial information. Testing on the
UAVid and LoveDA datasets with a 3090 GPU at 1024 ×1024 resolution achieved 115.6 fps
with accuracies of 67.8% mIoU and 52.4% mIoU, respectively.
Compared to single-branch and dual-branch networks, U-shaped networks extract
features at the encoder side and apply skip connections to pass these features to the
corresponding decoder layers. The features from each decoder layer are fused with the
up-sampled features from the encoder, serving as input for the next up-sampling layer.
This fusion of multi-scale features from the encoder improves segmentation accuracy.
However, U-shaped network decoders often need to perform global context feature extrac-

## Page 4

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 4 of 19
tion, and the complex fusion operations add extra computational burdens to the decoder.
Therefore, the decoder needs lightweight fusion operations and efficient global context
extraction mechanisms.
2.2. Global Contextual Information Module
Since CNN convolutions can only utilize local information to understand images,
many recent works have attempted to construct global context modules to capture global
contextual information. A popular approach is to integrate attention mechanisms into the
network modules.
Hu et al. first proposed the channel attention mechanism in SENet, where spatial
information is compressed into a global vector through pooling operations [ 15]. This global
vector is then transformed non-linearly, and weights are generated using the Sigmoid
function to multiply with the input. This process captures the inter-channel information in
the feature map, enhancing valuable features in the channels while suppressing less useful
ones. Later, Woo et al. combined channel attention with spatial attention mechanisms in
sequence, capturing both spatial positional information and inter-channel information [ 16].
Misra et al. established interactions between different dimensions by rotating feature maps
and applying pooling operations [17].
Although the above models combine channel and spatial attention mechanisms, per-
forming 2D global pooling leads to the loss of positional information, which is crucial
for generating spatial attention maps. This paper proposes a UNet-based model where
the ResNet18 is used as the encoder to extract features, and a coordinate attention mecha-
nism [ 18] is introduced into the decoder. A dual-branch module is designed to extract global
and local contextual information, with the global branch capturing global information and
the local branch focusing on local information.
3. Principles and Methods
3.1. Network Principles
This model is constructed based on the UNet structure, with the ResNet18 model
used as the encoder and the global local attention module used as the decoder, as shown
in Figure 2. The encoder of this model consists of four ResNet blocks, where the feature
maps are down-sampled at each stage with a scaling factor of 2. The decoder comprises
three global–local attention mechanisms and a shallow-feature fusion module: skip the
connection and use the most straightforward connection operation. The global–local
attention mechanism integrates corresponding feature information from the encoder to
extract semantic information about the features. In contrast, the shallow-feature fusion
module combines features from different scales of the encoder to enhance the spatial
information of shallow features.

## Page 5

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 5 of 19
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 19

 module combines features from di ﬀerent scales of the encoder to enhance the spatial in-
formation of shallow features.

Figure 2. Overall structure diagram of the proposed model. (*: Upsampling).
3.2. Global–Local A ttention Module
In the global–local a ttention module, both a global branch and a local branch were
designed to improve the model’s ability to ex tract and fuse contextual information from
feature maps. In the global branch, p ooling operations are applied along the x-axis and y-
axis, compressing the information in these di rections and embedding it into the feature
map. However, compressing only along the x-axis and y-axis overlooks the relationships
between neighboring pixels. Therefore, an addi tional local branch is designed, utilizing
convolution operations with kernel sizes of 1 × 1 and 3 × 3 to capture the relevant infor-mation between neighboring pixels. The ne twork structure is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 2. Overall structure diagram of the proposed model. (*: Upsampling).
3.2. Global–Local Attention Module
In the global–local attention module, both a global branch and a local branch were
designed to improve the model’s ability to extract and fuse contextual information from
feature maps. In the global branch, pooling operations are applied along the x-axis and y-
axis, compressing the information in these directions and embedding it into the feature map.
However, compressing only along the x-axis and y-axis overlooks the relationships between
neighboring pixels. Therefore, an additional local branch is designed, utilizing convolution
operations with kernel sizes of 1 ×1 and 3 ×3 to capture the relevant information between
neighboring pixels. The network structure is shown in Figure 3.
This module consists of a global attention branch and a local branch. The global
attention branch utilizes coordinate attention to extract global information, considering
both inter-channel relationships and positional information. The local branch applies two
convolutions with kernel sizes of 3 and 1 to capture local information from the feature map.
The global and local branches are then fused, enabling interaction between global and local
information, which enhances the algorithm’s accuracy.

## Page 6

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 6 of 19
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 19


Figure 3. Global–local a ttention module network structure (GLAM).
This module consists of a global a ttention branch and a local branch. The global at-
tention branch utilizes coordinate a ttention to extract global information, considering both
inter-channel relationships and positional information. The local branch applies two con-
volutions with kernel sizes of 3 and 1 to capture local information from the feature map. The global and local branches are then fuse d, enabling interaction between global and
local information, which enhances the algorithm’s accuracy.
Firstly, this article inputs the feature maps of four ResNet blocks into the correspond-
ing global–local a ttention modules through skip connections. The output of the deep
Figure 3. Global–local attention module network structure (GLAM).
Firstly, this article inputs the feature maps of four ResNet blocks into the corresponding
global–local attention modules through skip connections. The output of the deep global–
local attention modules will be fused with the skip-connected feature maps as the feature
input of the upper-level attention modules.
In the global branch, average pooling is performed along the horizontal and vertical
directions, resulting in two 1D vectors (H ×1 and 1 ×W).
Xavg=XAvgPool (Input ) (1)

## Page 7

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 7 of 19
Yavg=YAvgPool (Input ) (2)
These vectors are concatenated in the spatial dimension, followed by a 1 ×1 convolu-
tion to reduce the channel dimensions.
XYavg=Conv 2d 
Concat 
Xavg,Yavg
(3)
Then batch normalization (BN) and a non-linear activation are applied to encode the
spatial information in the vertical and horizontal directions. The result is then split back
into horizontal and vertical components, and a 1 ×1 convolution is used to restore the
channel count.
Fx,Fy=Split 
Relu 
BatchNorm 
XYavg
(4)
Wx,Wy=δ(Conv 1×1(Fx)),δ 
Conv 1×1 
Fy
(5)
Finally, a gating mechanism generates the weights, and the global contextual features
are obtained through weighted summation.
Y=X⊙Wx⊙Wy (6)
In the formula, Conv 1×1 represents a convolution operation with a kernel size of
1×1;XavgandYavgrepresent the coordinate information embedding in the horizontal and
vertical directions, respectively; δrepresents the Sigmoid function; Wx,Wyrepresent the
weights in the horizontal and vertical directions; ⊙represents element-wise multiplication.
For the local branch, The Input ∈Rˆ(C×H×W) is passed through convolution
operations with kernel sizes of 3 ×3 and 1 ×1, followed by a BN (Batch Normalization)
layer. The output of the local branch Zis obtained by element-wise addition of the processed
features. This process can be described as follows:
A=BatchNorm (Conv 3×3(Input )) (7)
B=BatchNorm (Conv 1×1(Input )) (8)
Z=A⊕B (9)
In the formula, ⊕represents the element-wise addition operation. We add the features
from the global and local branches. Then, we apply a depth-wise separable convolution
with a kernel size of 3 ×3, followed by a BN (Batch Normalization) layer to obtain the final
fused features. This process can be described as follows:
Output =BN(DWConv 3×3(Y⊕Z)) (10)
In the formula, DWConv 3×3 represents a depth-wise separable convolution with a
kernel size of 3 ×3.
3.3. Shallow Layer Feature Fusion Module
We introduce a shallow-feature fusion module to enhance the spatial details of shallow
layer features and improve classification accuracy, as shown in Figure 4. First, the features
from the other three ResNet blocks undergo up-sampling and convolution operations
to align their size and dimensionality with those of the features from the first ResNet
block. Subsequently, global feature representation is obtained through a global average
pooling operation in the spatial dimension. A 1 ×1 convolution is then applied to model
the inter-channel relationships, and a Sigmoid activation function is used to generate
channel weights.

## Page 8

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 8 of 19
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 19

 operations to align their size and dimensionality with those of the features from the ﬁrst
ResNet block. Subseque ntly, global feature representation is obtained through a global
average pooling operation in the spatial dimens ion. A 1 × 1 convolution is then applied to
model the inter-channel relationships, and a Si gmoid activation function is used to gener-
ate channel weights.

Figure 4. Shallow layer feature fusion module network structure (SLFM).
Next, the global features from the four sc ales are concatenated along the second di-
mension to obtain the corresponding output X.  The weights for each scale are then derived
using the softmax function along the second dimension. Finally, the generated weights
are multiplied element-wise with the co rresponding inputs and summed together.
4. Experimental Process and Analysis
In this paper, the model is trained on two datasets of UAV remote sensing imagery,
UAVid [19], UDD6 [20],  and LoveDA [21]. The model’s accuracy and inference speed are
tested and compared with several state-of-t he-art models proposed in recent years.
4.1. Dataset
The UAVid dataset is a high-resolution dataset (3840 × 2160 and 4096 × 2160) cap-
tured by drones, designed explicitly for urba n scene semantic segmentation tasks. It con-
tains 42 sequences. Each sequence includes ten images, resulting in a total of 420 images.
The dataset is divided into 20 training sequen ces, 7 validation sequences, and 15 test se-
quences; that is, the training set has 270 images, and the validation set has 150 images, which are independent of each other. The UA Vid dataset includes eight types of ground
Figure 4. Shallow layer feature fusion module network structure (SLFM).
Next, the global features from the four scales are concatenated along the second
dimension to obtain the corresponding output X. The weights for each scale are then
derived using the softmax function along the second dimension. Finally, the generated
weights are multiplied element-wise with the corresponding inputs and summed together.
4. Experimental Process and Analysis
In this paper, the model is trained on two datasets of UAV remote sensing imagery,
UAVid [ 19], UDD6 [ 20], and LoveDA [ 21]. The model’s accuracy and inference speed are
tested and compared with several state-of-the-art models proposed in recent years.
4.1. Dataset
The UAVid dataset is a high-resolution dataset (3840 ×2160 and 4096 ×2160) captured
by drones, designed explicitly for urban scene semantic segmentation tasks. It contains
42 sequences. Each sequence includes ten images, resulting in a total of 420 images.
The dataset is divided into 20 training sequences, 7 validation sequences, and 15 test
sequences; that is, the training set has 270 images, and the validation set has 150 images,
which are independent of each other. The UAVid dataset includes eight types of ground
objects: buildings, roads, static vehicles, trees, low vegetation, people, moving vehicles,
and cluttered backgrounds.
UDD6 is a dataset for the understanding and reconstruction of aerial scenes collected
and labeled by the Graphics and Interaction Laboratory of Peking University using DJI
Phantom 4 drones at a height between 60–100 m in four cities in China. The resolution of
the data is 4 k (4096 ×2160) or 12 M (4000 ×3000) and includes a variety of urban scenes.

## Page 9

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 9 of 19
The dataset is divided into 85 training images, 35 verification images and 20 test images,
and the training images and test images are independent of each other. This dataset is
divided into facades, roads, vegetation, cars, roofs, and others.
The LoveDa dataset constructs an urban–rural domain adaptive land-cover dataset,
which includes 5987 high-resolution images of 0.3 m from three different cities, Nanjing,
Changzhou, and Wuhan. Each image has a resolution of 1024 ×1024 and includes seven
categories: background, buildings, roads, water bodies, bare soil, forest land, and cultivated
land. According to the official LoveDA data, the training set consists of 2521 images, the
validation set consists of 1670 images, and the test set consists of 1796 images.
4.2. Experimental Conditions
The experiments were conducted using the PyTorch 2.1.0 deep learning framework and
the CUDA 11.8 library, with Python version 3.8, on a Windows 11 operating system. Model
training and testing were performed on an Intel Xeon Gold 6348 CPU (Inter, Shanghai,
China) and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 24 GB GPU (Nvidia, Shanghai, China) with
256 GB of RAM.
4.3. Performance Evaluation Metrics
In this paper, the evaluation metrics include the mean Intersection over Union (mIoU)
to measure the prediction accuracy of the algorithm, and the frames per second (FPS) to
assess the computational speed of the proposed model on the experimental hardware. The
mIoU is calculated as the average ratio of the intersection and union between the ground
truth and the predicted values for all classes. The formula for mIoU is as follows:
mIoU =1
m+1m
∑
i=0pii
∑m
j=0pij+∑m
j=0pji−pii(11)
In the formula, mrepresents the number of pixel classes; pijis the number of pixels
whose true class is ibut are predicted as class j;piiis the number of pixels correctly
predicted as a class, i, where the actual class is also i.
FPS is calculated as the ratio of the number of frames Nto the time required to process
them, representing the model’s computational speed:
fFPS=N
∑N
i=1Tfaçade(12)
In the formula, Nrepresents the number of frames, and Tiis the time required to
process the i-th image.
F1 is a statistical indicator used to measure the accuracy of binary classification models.
It is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a single metric to evaluate the
overall performance of the model. The range of F1 values is from 0 to 1, with higher values
indicating better performance of the model.
F1=2∗TP
TP+FP+TP+FN(13)
Among them, TPcorrectly predicted the positive class; that is, it was originally a
positive class and recognized the positive class as well; TNcorrectly predicted the negative
class; that is, it was originally a negative class and recognized a negative class as well; FP
is incorrectly predicted as a positive class, meaning it was originally a negative class but
recognized as a positive class; FNwas incorrectly predicted as a negative class, meaning it
was originally a positive class but was recognized as a negative class.

## Page 10

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 10 of 19
4.4. Comparative Analysis of Experimental Results
To validate the impact of each module in this paper on mIoU and FPS, we conducted
evaluations on the UDD6 dataset and the UAVid dataset. The evaluation metrics, mIoU
and FPS, were used to analyze the impact of the modules on the model’s segmentation
accuracy and inference speed.
During training, the AdamW optimizer was used to train the models, with the base
learning rate set to 0.0006. A cosine annealing strategy was applied to adjust the learning
rate. The batch size was set to 8, and the number of epochs to 40. The cross-entropy
loss function was used as the loss function during training. In the experiments, images
from both datasets were padded and cropped into eight patches of 1024 ×1024 pixels.
Data augmentation techniques, such as random vertical and horizontal flips and random
brightness adjustments, were applied to the input images.
4.4.1. UDD6 Ablation Study
In this paper, different combinations of modules were functionally verified on the
UDD6 dataset, with the results shown in Table 1. The baseline model used was Unet.
Table 1. Effect of modules on the UDD6 dataset.
ModelPer-Class IoU (%)mIoU
(%)F1
(%)OA
(%) Façade Road Vegetation Vehicle Roof Other
Baseline 44.1 51.8 30.2 65.6 37.3 75.0 45.8 61.9 71.2
Baseline + GLAM 62.1 65.4 60.7 77.3 65.2 88.7 65.8 79.5 84.4
Baseline + GLAM + SLFM 62.1 69.9 62.0 77.4 66.0 89.9 67.2 80.2 84.8
In Table 1, the mIoU, F1, and OA metrics were used to test the effect of the modules
on network performance. It can be observed that the added modules contributed to
a particular improvement in mIoU compared to the baseline model. After integrating
all proposed modules, the mIoU of this model reached 67%, an improvement of 21.2%
compared to the baseline model. Adding the GLAM module to the baseline model has
significantly improved the recognition of various types, especially in the Façade class, Road
class, Vegetation class, and Roof class, where the improvement is better, with an increase
of 18%, 13.6%, 30.5%, and 27.9%, respectively. When both the GLAM and SLFM modules
are added to the baseline model, compared to a single GLAM module, the segmentation
performance is better in the Road class, Vegetable class, and Other class, with improvements
of 4.5%, 1.3%, and 1.2%, respectively. For other categories, the effect remained the same or
slightly improved, with a 1.4% increase in mIoU, a 0.7% increase in the F1 score, and a 0.4%
increase in OA.
Figure 5 presents the results of ablation experiments on the UDD6 dataset, comparing
different scenarios. The highlighted sections indicate the differences between various
modules. Adding the modules enhances the model’s ability to segment details and small
objects more accurately. For example, when comparing the segmentation results from the
first and second rows, adding the modules improves the accuracy and enables precise
segmentation of object edges. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed modules.

## Page 11

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 11 of 19
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 19

 Figure 5. UDD ablation study. (The im age name is: DJI_0538.JPG).
4.4.2. UAVid Ablation Study
In this paper, the functionality of di ﬀerent module combinations was veri ﬁed on the
UAVid dataset, with results shown in Tabl e 1, where the baseline refers to Unet.
The results in Table 2 show that the modules remain e ﬀective on the UAVid dataset.
The addition of these modules to the baseline  brought about an increase in the segmenta-
tion accuracy, measured by mIoU (mean Intersection over Union). Speci ﬁcally, adding
individual and combined modu les resulted in 9% and 10% improvements in mIoU, re-
spectively, compared to the baseline.
Table 2. Eﬀect of the modules on the UAVid dataset. (Online Test).
Model Per-Class IoU (%) mIoU% Clutter Building Road Tree Vegetation Moving Car Static Car Human
Baseline 57 79 74 75 57 66 38 25 58
Baseline + GLAM 68 86 80 80 63 74 57 31 67
Baseline + GLAM +
SLFM 68 87 81 80 63 74 59 31 68
Figure 6 showcases the results of ablation  experiments on the UAVid dataset for the
proposed model. The results show that the proposed model enhances the detection of
small objects and details. Adding the GLAM module to the baseline model has improved
the precise segmentation of object edge detai ls. Building on this, incorporating the SLFM
module has enhanced the segmentation of smal l targets, such as vegetation recognition,
making it closer to accurate labels. These results demonstrate the generalization capability of the proposed modules, e ﬀectively improving the model’s segmentation accuracy while
achieving a balanced trade-o ﬀ between precision and speed.
Figure 5. UDD ablation study. (The image name is: DJI_0538.JPG).
4.4.2. UAVid Ablation Study
In this paper, the functionality of different module combinations was verified on the
UAVid dataset, with results shown in Table 1, where the baseline refers to Unet.
The results in Table 2 show that the modules remain effective on the UAVid dataset.
The addition of these modules to the baseline brought about an increase in the segmentation
accuracy, measured by mIoU (mean Intersection over Union). Specifically, adding individ-
ual and combined modules resulted in 9% and 10% improvements in mIoU, respectively,
compared to the baseline.
Table 2. Effect of the modules on the UAVid dataset. (Online Test).
ModelPer-Class IoU (%)
mIoU%Clutter Building Road Tree Vegetation Moving Car Static Car Human
Baseline 57 79 74 75 57 66 38 25 58
Baseline + GLAM 68 86 80 80 63 74 57 31 67
Baseline + GLAM +
SLFM68 87 81 80 63 74 59 31 68
Figure 6 showcases the results of ablation experiments on the UAVid dataset for the
proposed model. The results show that the proposed model enhances the detection of
small objects and details. Adding the GLAM module to the baseline model has improved
the precise segmentation of object edge details. Building on this, incorporating the SLFM
module has enhanced the segmentation of small targets, such as vegetation recognition,
making it closer to accurate labels. These results demonstrate the generalization capability
of the proposed modules, effectively improving the model’s segmentation accuracy while
achieving a balanced trade-off between precision and speed.

## Page 12

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 12 of 19
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 19

 Figure 6. UAVid ablation study. (The image name is: Seg5\000400.png).
4.4.3. UAVid Comparison Experiment
To verify the proposed algorithm, we co nducted a comparative study on the UAVid
dataset with various network models, such as  CGNet [22], ContextNet [23], DABNet [24],
EDANet [25], FPENet [10], LinkNet [26], SegN et [8], LCNet [27], and UnetFormer [14].
The comparison results are shown in Table 3.  The proposed algorithm achieved the high-
est mIoU of 68%. The proposed model outperformed CGNet, ContextNet, DABNet,
EDANet, FPENet, LinkNet, and SegNet in UA Vid class recognition,  and achieved compa-
rable performance with UnetFormer. Speci ﬁcally, our model outperforms UnetFormer by
3% in static vehicle recognition.
Table 3. The eﬀectiveness of di ﬀerent algorithms on the UAVid dataset (Resolution: 1024 × 1024) .
Model Clutter Building Road Tree Vegetation Moving Car Static Car Human
CGNet 53 75 74 71 54 62 32 20
ContextNet 54 76 73 72 53 61 31 18
DABNet 57 79 76 75 58 67 38 25
EDANet 57 79 76 74 56 65 38 24
FPENet 47 69 67 65 46 44 17 0
LinkNet 54 78 73 74 55 66 36 13
SegNet 50 74 71 68 47 60 23 18
UnetFormer 68 87 81 80 63 74 56 31
LCNet 55 76 76 73 55 62 30 10
Ours 68 87 81 80 63 74 59 31
This article compares the prediction results of di ﬀerent models on the Uavid dataset
in Figure 7, with some apparent di ﬀerences marked with white wireframes. From the ﬁg-
ure, it can be observed that the proposed mo del demonstrates superior segmentation ac-
curacy for edge details compared to other model s. For instance, in the areas of the house
and the grass beside the road highlighted in the white box, the proposed model achieves
more precise recognition of the house edges and the grass along the road than the other models.
Figure 6. UAVid ablation study. (The image name is: Seg5 \000400.png).
4.4.3. UAVid Comparison Experiment
To verify the proposed algorithm, we conducted a comparative study on the UAVid
dataset with various network models, such as CGNet [ 22], ContextNet [ 23], DABNet [ 24],
EDANet [ 25], FPENet [ 10], LinkNet [ 26], SegNet [ 8], LCNet [ 27], and UnetFormer [ 14]. The
comparison results are shown in Table 3. The proposed algorithm achieved the highest
mIoU of 68%. The proposed model outperformed CGNet, ContextNet, DABNet, EDANet,
FPENet, LinkNet, and SegNet in UAVid class recognition, and achieved comparable perfor-
mance with UnetFormer. Specifically, our model outperforms UnetFormer by 3% in static
vehicle recognition.
Table 3. The effectiveness of different algorithms on the UAVid dataset (Resolution: 1024 ×1024).
Model Clutter Building Road Tree Vegetation Moving Car Static Car Human
CGNet 53 75 74 71 54 62 32 20
ContextNet 54 76 73 72 53 61 31 18
DABNet 57 79 76 75 58 67 38 25
EDANet 57 79 76 74 56 65 38 24
FPENet 47 69 67 65 46 44 17 0
LinkNet 54 78 73 74 55 66 36 13
SegNet 50 74 71 68 47 60 23 18
UnetFormer 68 87 81 80 63 74 56 31
LCNet 55 76 76 73 55 62 30 10
Ours 68 87 81 80 63 74 59 31
This article compares the prediction results of different models on the Uavid dataset in
Figure 7, with some apparent differences marked with white wireframes. From the figure,
it can be observed that the proposed model demonstrates superior segmentation accuracy
for edge details compared to other models. For instance, in the areas of the house and the
grass beside the road highlighted in the white box, the proposed model achieves more
precise recognition of the house edges and the grass along the road than the other models.

## Page 13

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 13 of 19
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 19

 Figure 7. Comparison of Visual Results from Di ﬀerent Models on UAVid Da taset. (The image name
is: seq1\00800.png).
4.4.4. UDD6 Comparison Experiment
To verify the robustness of the model, we further conducted comparative experi-
ments on the UDD6 dataset, and the results are shown in Table 4. The table shows that
the proposed model achieved a mIoU of 67%. The proposed model outperformed other models in recognizing all categories on the UDD6 dataset. Speci ﬁcally, it surpassed the
highest performance of di ﬀerent models in the road catego ry by 0.7%, in the vegetation
category by 2%, in the vehicle category by 1%, and in the roof category by 1.5%.
The data indicates that the proposed model signi ﬁcantly improves recognition accu-
racy for the façade, road, vegetation, and r oof categories compared to other models. The
data suggests that the proposed model is more precise in segmenting the contours of more
prominent categories.
This article visually compares the prediction results of di ﬀerent models on the UDD6
dataset in Figure 8, with signi ﬁcant diﬀerences highlighted by white bounding boxes.
From the ﬁgure, it can be observed that the prop osed model demonstrates greater accu-
racy in segmenting edge details compared to other models. For instance, the segmentation
of roofs and walls is more prec ise, with contours that closely match the ground truth la-
bels. Additionally, the proposed model correctly identi ﬁes instances where other net-
works misclassify labels.
Table 4. Comparison of di ﬀerent algorithms on UDD6 dataset (Resolution: 1024 × 1024).
Model Per-Class IoU (%) mIoU F1 OA Façade Road Vegetation Vehicle Roof
CGNet 44 57.8 33.1 60.6 43.3 47.8 64.0 72.7
ContextNet 44.3 58.9 31.7 67.8 52.4 51 66.6 76.8
DABNet 47.4 62.1 42.3 59.8 53.2 53 68.9 76.5 EDANet 44.6 57.8 36.6 62.2 48 49.8 66.0 74.7
FPENet 41.3 47 20.5 60 36.7 41.1 57.0 68.7
LinkNet 43.8 56.2 20.2 65.2 44.4 46 61.4 73.3
SegNet 32.6 46.2 20.9 57.3 31.7 37.8 53.6 64.9
UnetFormer 62.8 69.2 60 75 64.5 66.4 70.5 60.1
LCNet 39.9 47.3 18.7 56.9 39.8 40.5 56.4 68.6
Ours 62 69.9 62 76 66 67.2 80.2 84.8

Figure 7. Comparison of Visual Results from Different Models on UAVid Dataset. (The image name
is: seq1 \00800.png).
4.4.4. UDD6 Comparison Experiment
To verify the robustness of the model, we further conducted comparative experiments
on the UDD6 dataset, and the results are shown in Table 4. The table shows that the
proposed model achieved a mIoU of 67%. The proposed model outperformed other models
in recognizing all categories on the UDD6 dataset. Specifically, it surpassed the highest
performance of different models in the road category by 0.7%, in the vegetation category
by 2%, in the vehicle category by 1%, and in the roof category by 1.5%.
Table 4. Comparison of different algorithms on UDD6 dataset (Resolution: 1024 ×1024).
ModelPer-Class IoU (%)mIoU F1 OA
Façade Road Vegetation Vehicle Roof
CGNet 44 57.8 33.1 60.6 43.3 47.8 64.0 72.7
ContextNet 44.3 58.9 31.7 67.8 52.4 51 66.6 76.8
DABNet 47.4 62.1 42.3 59.8 53.2 53 68.9 76.5
EDANet 44.6 57.8 36.6 62.2 48 49.8 66.0 74.7
FPENet 41.3 47 20.5 60 36.7 41.1 57.0 68.7
LinkNet 43.8 56.2 20.2 65.2 44.4 46 61.4 73.3
SegNet 32.6 46.2 20.9 57.3 31.7 37.8 53.6 64.9
UnetFormer 62.8 69.2 60 75 64.5 66.4 70.5 60.1
LCNet 39.9 47.3 18.7 56.9 39.8 40.5 56.4 68.6
Ours 62 69.9 62 76 66 67.2 80.2 84.8
The data indicates that the proposed model significantly improves recognition accu-
racy for the façade, road, vegetation, and roof categories compared to other models. The
data suggests that the proposed model is more precise in segmenting the contours of more
prominent categories.
This article visually compares the prediction results of different models on the UDD6
dataset in Figure 8, with significant differences highlighted by white bounding boxes. From
the figure, it can be observed that the proposed model demonstrates greater accuracy in
segmenting edge details compared to other models. For instance, the segmentation of
roofs and walls is more precise, with contours that closely match the ground truth labels.
Additionally, the proposed model correctly identifies instances where other networks
misclassify labels.

## Page 14

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 14 of 19
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 19

 Figure 8. Comparison of visual results from di ﬀerent models on the UDD6 dataset. (The image name
is: DJI_0667.JPG).
4.4.5. LoveDA Ablation Study
In order to verify the universality of the model in this article, the LoveDa dataset was
selected, which includes urban and rural scenarios to validate the universality of this ar-
ticle. The results are shown in the Table 5. The GLAM module proposed in this article has
signiﬁcantly improved in various categories on the baseline model, with improvements
of 8.4%, 17.8%, and 9.6% in the road, bare soil, and cultivated land categories, 8.6% in
mIoU, 6.7% in the F1 value, and 5.5% in th e OA value. After adding the SLFM module,
the model in this article showed good improvement in recognition rates for various types,
with improvements of 2.8%, 1.9%, and 2.9% in the background, building, and bare soil
categories, respectively. It also showed a 2% increase in mIoU, a 1.5% increase in the F1
value, and a 1.5% increase in the OA value.
Table 5. Comparison of di ﬀerent algorithms on LoveDA dataset (Resolution: 1024 × 1024).
Model Per-Class IoU (%)   mIoU (%) F1 (%) OA (%) Background Building Road Water Barren Forest Agriculture
Unet 58.4 64.3 59.9 73.4 43.2 49.8 65.6 59.2 73.9 75.8
Unet + GLAM 63.5 69.8 68.3 77.9 61.0 56.7 75.2 67.8 80.6 81.3
Unet + GLAM +
SLFM 66.3 71.7 69.7 79.4 63.9 57.9 76.7 69.8 82.1 82.8
This article visualizes the ablation expe riments conducted on the LoveDA dataset.
As shown in Figure 9, the model proposed in this paper performs be tter in edge segmen-
tation compared to the baseline model, and performs be tter in edge segmentation between
adjacent di ﬀerent objects. In Figure 9a, the black wireframe shows be tter segmentation
performance for the edges of buildings and roads compared to the baseline model.
Figure 8. Comparison of visual results from different models on the UDD6 dataset. (The image name
is: DJI_0667.JPG).
4.4.5. LoveDA Ablation Study
In order to verify the universality of the model in this article, the LoveDa dataset
was selected, which includes urban and rural scenarios to validate the universality of this
article. The results are shown in the Table 5. The GLAM module proposed in this article
has significantly improved in various categories on the baseline model, with improvements
of 8.4%, 17.8%, and 9.6% in the road, bare soil, and cultivated land categories, 8.6% in
mIoU, 6.7% in the F1 value, and 5.5% in the OA value. After adding the SLFM module,
the model in this article showed good improvement in recognition rates for various types,
with improvements of 2.8%, 1.9%, and 2.9% in the background, building, and bare soil
categories, respectively. It also showed a 2% increase in mIoU, a 1.5% increase in the F1
value, and a 1.5% increase in the OA value.
Table 5. Comparison of different algorithms on LoveDA dataset (Resolution: 1024 ×1024).
ModelPer-Class IoU (%) mIoU
(%)F1 (%)OA
(%) Background Building Road Water Barren Forest Agriculture
Unet 58.4 64.3 59.9 73.4 43.2 49.8 65.6 59.2 73.9 75.8
Unet + GLAM 63.5 69.8 68.3 77.9 61.0 56.7 75.2 67.8 80.6 81.3
Unet + GLAM +
SLFM66.3 71.7 69.7 79.4 63.9 57.9 76.7 69.8 82.1 82.8
This article visualizes the ablation experiments conducted on the LoveDA dataset. As
shown in Figure 9, the model proposed in this paper performs better in edge segmentation
compared to the baseline model, and performs better in edge segmentation between
adjacent different objects. In Figure 9a, the black wireframe shows better segmentation
performance for the edges of buildings and roads compared to the baseline model.

## Page 15

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 15 of 19
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 19


Figure 9. LoveDA ablation study. (The ( a) image name is: urban\4178.png, the ( b) image name is:
rural\2522.png).
4.4.6. LoveDA Comparison Experiment
This article conducted comparative experiments with other models on the LoveDA
dataset, as shown in Table 6. The model prop osed in this article has shown certain im-
provements in various types of recognition compared to other models, achieving the high-
est recognition rate in each type. Among them, compared with other models with the highest recognition rates, the background class improved by 0.6%, the building class im-
proved by 1%, the road class improved by 1. 3%, the water body class improved by 0.6%,
the bare soil class improved by 0.7%, the fo rest class improved by 0.9%, and the mIoU
class improved by 1.3%, The F1 value increa sed by 1%, and the OA value increased by
0.8%. From a data perspective, the model prop osed in this article has improved its ability
to recognize regular edges for similar buildings and roads.
Table 6. Eﬀect of the modules on the LoveDA dataset.
Model Per-Class IoU (%)   mIoU (%) F1 (%) OA (%) Background Building Road Water Barren Forest Agriculture
CGNet 56.8 59.1 55.1  71.6 36.6 47.7 63.8 55.9 71.1 74.1
ContextNet 56.8 57.7 55.4 72.2 37.6 47.8 64.8 56.1 71.2 74.2
DABNet 59.0 64.5 61.8 74.5 49.1 51.3 68.4 61.2 75.6 77.1 EDANet 58.1 63.2 60.1 73.7 46.2 50.0 67.3 59.8 74.4 76.2
FPENet 52.8 45.8 37.9 64.6 25.0 41.1 56.0 46.2 62.2 68.0
LinkNet 58.3 63.0 59.8  73.8 43.5 50.1 67.3 59.3 74.1 76.2
SegNet 53.4 51.8 46.9 60.4 28.0 46.3 58.3 49.3 65.4 69.3
UNetFormer 65.7 70.7 68.5 78.8 63.2 57.0 75.6 68.5 81.1 82.0
LCNet 57.1 61.9 57.0  73.0 43.0 48.3 66.0 58.0 73.0 75.2
Ours 66.3 71.7 69.7 79.4 63.9 57.9 76.7 69.8 82.1 82.8
Figure 9. LoveDA ablation study. (The ( a) image name is: urban \4178.png, the ( b) image name
is: rural \2522.png).
4.4.6. LoveDA Comparison Experiment
This article conducted comparative experiments with other models on the LoveDA
dataset, as shown in Table 6. The model proposed in this article has shown certain improve-
ments in various types of recognition compared to other models, achieving the highest
recognition rate in each type. Among them, compared with other models with the highest
recognition rates, the background class improved by 0.6%, the building class improved by
1%, the road class improved by 1.3%, the water body class improved by 0.6%, the bare soil
class improved by 0.7%, the forest class improved by 0.9%, and the mIoU class improved
by 1.3%, The F1 value increased by 1%, and the OA value increased by 0.8%. From a data
perspective, the model proposed in this article has improved its ability to recognize regular
edges for similar buildings and roads.
Table 6. Effect of the modules on the LoveDA dataset.
ModelPer-Class IoU (%)mIoU
(%)F1 (%) OA (%)Background Building Road Water Barren Forest Agriculture
CGNet 56.8 59.1 55.1 71.6 36.6 47.7 63.8 55.9 71.1 74.1
ContextNet 56.8 57.7 55.4 72.2 37.6 47.8 64.8 56.1 71.2 74.2
DABNet 59.0 64.5 61.8 74.5 49.1 51.3 68.4 61.2 75.6 77.1
EDANet 58.1 63.2 60.1 73.7 46.2 50.0 67.3 59.8 74.4 76.2
FPENet 52.8 45.8 37.9 64.6 25.0 41.1 56.0 46.2 62.2 68.0
LinkNet 58.3 63.0 59.8 73.8 43.5 50.1 67.3 59.3 74.1 76.2
SegNet 53.4 51.8 46.9 60.4 28.0 46.3 58.3 49.3 65.4 69.3
UNetFormer 65.7 70.7 68.5 78.8 63.2 57.0 75.6 68.5 81.1 82.0
LCNet 57.1 61.9 57.0 73.0 43.0 48.3 66.0 58.0 73.0 75.2
Ours 66.3 71.7 69.7 79.4 63.9 57.9 76.7 69.8 82.1 82.8

## Page 16

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 16 of 19
This article compares the visualization results of each model, as shown in the figure. In
Figure 10a, compared with other models, the model proposed in this paper has significantly
improved the object edge segmentation effect, especially in the black wireframe where
effective segmentation was performed on the edge parts contained in adjacent objects. In
Figure 10b, the model proposed in this article performs well in segmenting rural scenes.
For example, in the black wireframe, the segmentation effect of bare soil and forest edges is
closer to the real segmentation.
Sensors 2025 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 19

 This article compares the visualization results of each model, as shown in the ﬁgure.
In Figure 10a, compared with other models, the model proposed in this paper has signif-
icantly improved the object edge segmentation e ﬀect, especially in the black wireframe
where eﬀective segmentation was performed on the edge parts contained in adjacent ob-
jects. In Figure 10b, the model proposed in th is article performs well  in segmenting rural
scenes. For example, in the black wireframe, the segmentation e ﬀect of bare soil and forest
edges is closer to the real segmentation.

Figure 10. Comparison of visual results from di ﬀerent models on the LoveDA dataset. (The ( a) im-
age name is: urban\4178.png, the ( b) image name is: rural\2522.png).
4.4.7. Comparison of Computational Complexity
This article will present a comparison be tween the parameter count, computational
complexity, and inference speed of di ﬀerent models, as shown in Table 7. The model pro-
posed in this article has a slight advantage in  terms of speed. In terms of inference speed,
the FPS of our model is 72.4, slightly higher than CGNet, FPENet, and FPENet. However,
the model in this article has a parameter count of 12.1 M, which is only lower than SegNet and slightly lower than LinkNet and UnetFomer. In terms of computational complexity,
it is 49.24 G, only lower than LinkNet and SegNet, and slightly lower than UnetFomer.
Based on the segmentation performance of Tabl es 4–6 on various datasets, it can be seen
that our model has e ﬀectively improved segmentation accuracy compared to other mod-
els. This advantage makes our model suitable for the real-time segmentation of low-
Figure 10. Comparison of visual results from different models on the LoveDA dataset. (The ( a) image
name is: urban \4178.png, the ( b) image name is: rural \2522.png).
4.4.7. Comparison of Computational Complexity
This article will present a comparison between the parameter count, computational
complexity, and inference speed of different models, as shown in Table 7. The model
proposed in this article has a slight advantage in terms of speed. In terms of inference
speed, the FPS of our model is 72.4, slightly higher than CGNet, FPENet, and FPENet.
However, the model in this article has a parameter count of 12.1 M, which is only lower
than SegNet and slightly lower than LinkNet and UnetFomer. In terms of computational
complexity, it is 49.24 G, only lower than LinkNet and SegNet, and slightly lower than
UnetFomer. Based on the segmentation performance of Tables 4–6 on various datasets, it
can be seen that our model has effectively improved segmentation accuracy compared to
other models. This advantage makes our model suitable for the real-time segmentation of
low- altitude drone images.

## Page 17

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 17 of 19
Table 7. Comparison of parameter quantity and speed among different models.
Model Params Flops Speed
CGNet 492 K 14.24 G 64.7
ContextNet 874 K 3.59 G 147.7
DABNet 753 K 21.6 G 81.3
EDANet 683 K 17.83 G 96.3
FPENet 114 K 3.15 G 71.7
LinkNet 11.5 M 49.0 G 113.6
SegNet 29.4 M 645.12 G 18.5
UNetFormer 11.8 M 46.97 G 83.1
LCNet 508 K 15.98 G 102.1
Ours 12.1 M 48.24 G 72.4
5. Discussion
The article designs a global–local attention module for extracting global features and a
shallow-feature fusion module. The global–local attention module adopts a dual-branch
structure, where a lightweight attention mechanism is introduced into the global branch to
account for the real-time requirements of drone tasks. The global features extracted from a
single global branch lack certain local information. Therefore, an additional local branch is
designed to capture local information and then fused with global features to address this
issue. As shown in Figure 5, the visualization results of the global–local module added
to the baseline model enhance the recognition of walls, making it more aligned with the
actual labels.
The low-level-feature fusion module utilizes features from the U-Net’s down-sampling
layers. The shallowest down-sampled features contain rich spatial information but have
limited semantic information, while the deeper ones are rich in semantic information but
lack spatial details. This article designs a shallow-feature module to fuse deep and shallow
features, which are then output for the decoder’s feature fusion, solving the problem of
deep feature output from the decoder lacking spatial information, especially for small object
recognition, as shown in Figure 6. Although this module is added to the skip connections
in the U-Net to reduce its impact on model speed, it is only added at the top layer, thus not
significantly affecting the overall speed of the model, as shown in Table 3.
However, the recognition performance of the model proposed in this article is not
satisfactory in some classes. As shown in Tables 2 and 3, the recognition performance of our
model in the Human class on the UAVid dataset is poor. Combined with the performance
of our model on the UDD6, UAVid, and LoveDA datasets, as shown in Figures 5–10,
our model performs well in object edge segmentation. However, there is still room for
improvement in small object segmentation.
6. Conclusions
This paper proposes a real-time semantic segmentation algorithm based on a channel
attention mechanism. The model primarily comprises an encoder, a global–local attention
module, and a shallow-feature fusion module.
First, a multi-scale shallow-feature fusion module is designed in the top-level skip
connections to enhance features by integrating the characteristics from different stages of
the encoder.
Second, the proposed global–local attention module effectively combines global and
local information in channel and spatial dimensions, resulting in better feature extraction.
The proposed model achieves a real-time performance of 72.4 FPS with an input
resolution of 1024 ×1024 on the UAVid test set, with an accuracy of 68% mIoU. Similarly,
the UDD6 test set achieves an accuracy of 67% mIoU at the exact resolution, demonstrating

## Page 18

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 18 of 19
the effectiveness of the proposed model. The proposed model achieves a better balance
between accuracy and real-time performance than other algorithms.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, G.L.; Methodology, G.L.; Software, Z.Z.; Validation, Z.Z.;
Formal analysis, Z.Z.; Writing—original draft, Z.Z.; Writing—review & editing, G.L. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: All data included in this study are available upon request by contact
with the corresponding author.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript.
mIoU mean Intersection over Union
GLAM global–local attention module
SLFM shallow layer feature fusion Module
References
1. Chowdhury, T.; Rahnemoonfar, M.; Murphy, R.; Fernandes, O. Comprehensive semantic segmentation on high resolution UAV
imagery for natural disaster damage assessment. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big
Data), Atlanta, GA, USA, 10–13 December 2020; pp. 3904–3913. [CrossRef]
2. Rahnemoonfar, M.; Chowdhury, T.; Murphy, R. RescueNet: A high resolution UAV semantic segmentation dataset for natural
disaster damage assessment. Sci. Data 2023 ,10, 913. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Tijtgat, N.; Van Ranst, W.; Volckaert, B.; Goedemé, T.; De Turck, F. Embedded real-time object detection for a UAV warning
system. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCVW), Venice, Italy,
22–29 October 2017; pp. 2110–2118. [CrossRef]
4. Lu, Y.-R.; Sun, D. Development of real-time unmanned aerial vehicle urban object detection system with federated learning.
J. Aerosp. Inf. Syst. 2024 ,21, 547–553. [CrossRef]
5. Ke, R.; Li, Z.; Tang, J.; Pan, Z.; Wang, Y. Real-time traffic flow parameter estimation from UAV video based on ensemble classifier
and optical flow. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2019 ,20, 54–64. [CrossRef]
6. Tsouros, D.C.; Bibi, S.; Sarigiannidis, P .G. A review on UAV-based applications for precision agriculture. Information 2019 ,
10, 349. [CrossRef]
7. Bouguettaya, A.; Zarzour, H.; Taberkit, A.M.; Kechida, A. A review on early wildfire detection from unmanned aerial vehicles
using deep learning-based computer vision algorithms. Signal Process. 2022 ,190, 108309. [CrossRef]
8. Badrinarayanan, V .; Kendall, A.; Cipolla, R. SegNet: A deep convolutional encoder-decoder architecture for image segmentation.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2017 ,39, 2481–2495. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Las Vegas, NV , USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 770–778. [CrossRef]
10. Liu, M.; Yin, H. Efficient pyramid context encoding and feature embedding for semantic segmentation. Image Vis. Comput. 2021 ,
111, 104195. [CrossRef]
11. Yu, C.; Wang, J.; Peng, C.; Gao, C.; Yu, G.; Sang, N. Bisenet: Bilateral segmentation network for real-time semantic segmentation.
In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Munich, Germany, 8–14 September 2018; pp. 325–341.
12. Fan, M.; Lai, S.; Huang, J.; Wei, X.; Chai, Z.; Luo, J.; Wei, X. Rethinking bisenet for real-time semantic segmentation. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Nashville, TN, USA, 19–25 June 2021; pp. 9716–9725.
13. Zhang, W.; Huang, Z.; Luo, G.; Chen, T.; Wang, X.; Liu, W.; Yu, G.; Shen, C. Topformer: Token pyramid transformer for mobile
semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, New Orleans,
LA, USA, 18–24 June 2022; pp. 12083–12093.
14. Wang, L.; Li, R.; Zhang, C.; Fang, S.; Duan, C.; Meng, X.; Atkinson, P .M. UNetFormer: A UNet-like transformer for efficient
semantic segmentation of remote sensing urban scene imagery. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 2022 ,190, 196–214. [CrossRef]
15. Hu, J.; Shen, L.; Sun, G. Squeeze-and-excitation networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18–23 June 2018; pp. 7132–7141.

## Page 19

Sensors 2025 ,25, 1786 19 of 19
16. Woo, S.; Park, J.; Lee, J.-Y.; Kweon, I.S. Cbam: Convolutional block attention module. In Proceedings of the European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV), Munich, Germany, 8–14 September 2018; pp. 3–19.
17. Misra, D.; Nalamada, T.; Arasanipalai, A.U.; Hou, Q. Rotate to attend: Convolutional triplet attention module. In Proceedings
of the 2021 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), Waikoloa, HI, USA, 3–8 January 2021;
pp. 3138–3147. [CrossRef]
18. Hou, Q.; Zhou, D.; Feng, J. Coordinate attention for efficient mobile network design. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Nashville, TN, USA, 19–25 June 2021; pp. 13708–13717. [CrossRef]
19. Lyu, Y.; Vosselman, G.; Xia, G.-S.; Yilmaz, A.; Yang, M.Y. UAVid: A semantic segmentation dataset for UAV imagery.
ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 2020 ,165, 108–119. [CrossRef]
20. Chen, Y.; Wang, Y.; Lu, P .; Chen, Y.; Wang, G. Large-scale structure from motion with semantic constraints of aerial images. In
Pattern Recognition and Computer Vision: Proceedings of the First Chinese Conference, PRCV 2018, Guangzhou, China, 23–26 November
2018, Proceedings, Part I 1 ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2018; pp. 347–359.
21. Wang, J.; Zheng, Z.; Ma, A.; Lu, X.; Zhong, Y. LoveDA: A remote sensing land-cover dataset for domain adaptive semantic
segmentation. arXiv 2021 , arXiv:2110.08733.
22. Wu, T.; Tang, S.; Zhang, R.; Cao, J.; Zhang, Y. CGNet: A lightweight context guided network for semantic segmentation. IEEE
Trans. Image Process. 2021 ,30, 1169–1179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Poudel, R.P .; Bonde, U.; Liwicki, S.; Zach, C. Contextnet: Exploring context and detail for semantic segmentation in real-time.
arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1805.04554.
24. Li, G.; Yun, I.; Kim, J.; Kim, J. Dabnet: Depth-wise asymmetric bottleneck for real-time semantic segmentation.
arXiv 2019 , arXiv:1907.11357.
25. Lo, S.-Y.; Hang, H.-M.; Chan, S.-W.; Lin, J.-J. Efficient dense modules of asymmetric convolution for real-time semantic segmen-
tation. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM International Conference on Multimedia in Asia, Beijing, China, 16–18 December 2019;
pp. 1–6.
26. Chaurasia, A.; Culurciello, E. Linknet: Exploiting encoder representations for efficient semantic segmentation. In Proceedings
of the 2017 IEEE Visual Communications and Image Processing (VCIP), St. Petersburg, FL, USA, 10–13 December 2017; IEEE:
Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2017; pp. 1–4.
27. Liu, S.; Cheng, J.; Liang, L.; Bai, H.; Dang, W. Lightweight Semantic Segmentation Network for UAV Remote Sensing Images.
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote Sens. 2021 ,14, 8287–8296. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
